The negative effects of free parking on cities have also long been established. As Shoup has explored in a variety of books, free parking amounts to a nationwide subsidy on par with American defense spending. Because city residents expect free parking and car owners tend to ignore the negative externalities and costs of driving, free parking incentivizes driving when other means of faster, cleaner, and often more reliable transit are readily available. Traffic and pollution increase; congestion and the economic waste brought on by stopped traffic increase; and fatalities and pedestrian injuries increase as the number vehicle miles increases. Space that could be otherwise used for people or used to capture revenue is reserved to reward behavior harmful to urban life and urban residents.

Then there’s the fact that on-street parking wasn’t always free or even legal in New York City. For decades, cars weren’t permitted to park overnight on city streets; it wasn’t until the 1950s, when the Department of Sanitation wanted to clean streets during the day, that the city chose to make a bad deal for itself and a good one for drivers. In exchange for free overnight parking, drivers would agree to move their cars every few days to accommodate street sweepers. Thus began the disastrous practice of giving away street space, and creating a wasteful system in which drivers or simply run their engines for the sake of it so street cleaners can get by.

Charging for parking—whether through a massive expansion of metered space, a residential permit program, or both—rationalizes a system of transportation that currently encourages driving. As Shoup has detailed, charging for parking helps free up spaces by reducing demand, and drivers spend less time circling for spots and more time out of their cars, interacting with the city. In New York, where so many cars are registered out of state, a permit program could capture car registration fees lost to lax enforcement while allowing the city to realize revenue from underpriced public space. (Those hundreds of millions of square feet of sure could fund a lot of park improvement plans.)

Removing parking, of course, creates a political firestorm, and the Times article features its fair share of drivers complaining about the loss of a few thousand parking spots over the past few years, as the city has tried to keep pedestrians safe and make cycling safer. But in the age of climate change and of enlightened thinking about the allocation of street space, it’s time to end the free parking giveaway. The city can start to capture the billions of dollars in currently gives away as subsidies to drivers, reduce congestion, and reallocate new revenue to transit development in underserved areas. The end of car culture is coming and the city’s politicians should pick up the cause of Community Board 7 as it fights the good fight against free parking.
