Imagine what New York City could do with 500 million square feet of public space.

Imagine how much more room for people and housing and parks New York City would have if more than 10,000 football fields’ worth of space suddenly became available. Or imagine how much revenue the city could generate if it charged anything close to market rate for each of the 2.94 million parking spaces that make up this approximately 500 million square feet of public space.

Free parking in New York City and the problems it causes is currently having a moment. After years of withering attacks by Donald Shoup, a UCLA urban planning professor who has made the fight against parking his life’s calling, a Manhattan community board has now picked up the thread. Community Board 7’s transportation committee passed a resolution earlier this year calling for an end to on-street parking in its district, though the board has since walked that proposal back slightly.

But the board has a point: The costs of free parking—cars sitting idle for days on end, essentially converting what should be public space into free private storage, or adding to traffic and pollution as drivers circle endlessly for their subsidized 180 square feet of street space—have become abundantly clear. And with congestion pricing rolling out in a year, some New Yorkers want to reclaim all of this space, while some others want to price it accordingly.

In its examination of the issue, the New York Times asked, “Could New York City Eliminate Free Street Parking?” The answer is yes: There’s never been a better time to end, once and for all, this massive giveaway of hundreds of millions of square feet of our city to drivers.
First, some numbers. Based upon well-established research, New York City has approximately 3 million on-street parking spaces, and of those, more than 95 percent are free. (The rest are available for a nominal fee during business hours only.) And this massive giveaway benefits a minority of city households: According to Census data, of New York City’s 3.1 million households, approximately 55 percent are car-free. In Manhattan, currently the subject of the fiercest debates over street space, a whopping 76.6 percent of households are car-free.

Meanwhile, as with the arguments I made here on Curbed last year in favor of congestion pricing, charging for parking largely affects those who are well-off. Overall, New York City’s car-owning households have a median income of $85,000, well above the city’s median household income of $55,000 and more than double the $40,000 median income of car-free households.

In Manhattan, where the borough-wide median income is $75,000, car-owning households report a median income of $134,000, while car-free households have a median income of $69,000. Simply put, free street parking is a giveaway to people who don’t need special perks and is a poor use of public space in a city where space is at a premium. 
